You enter a URL into a web browser

The subject I'd like to talk to you about today is what happens when you type a url into a browser or click on link as you surf around the web
This is something that we all take for granted, and with good reason, there is no need to really know what is happening but it's good to know whats happening under the covers
So I'd like to talk you through the series of steps that happen, to make the content you want to see appear

The browser looks up the IP address for the domain name via DNS

        The first thing that needs to happen is that the browser needs to translate the domain name, like google.com or bbc.co.uk into an IP address
        Every single URL on the internet has a unique IP address assigned to it.
        www.google.com has an IP address of 209.85.227.104
        Can reach it via either address
        This is achieved using the Domain Name System (DNS). is a database that maintains the name of the website (URL) and the particular IP address it links to
        The main purpose of DNS is human-friendly navigation.
        how could you possibly remember all the ip addresses of all the different websites you want o visit

        In order to find the DNS record, the browser checks four caches.

        First, it checks the browser cache. If you've visited the domain before
        Secons, it checks the router cache . if somneone on your network has visited that domain before
        Third, it checks the ISP cache. if somneone who shares your ISP has visited that domain before
        Lastly, if it can't find any in the cache it goes out onto the internet to lookup the address

        Directory of all domains and what their corresponding IP address is
        Like a phone book

Browser initiates a TCP connection with the server.

        TCP/IP three-way handshake
        the client and the server exchange SYN(synchronize) and ACK(acknowledge) messages to establish a connection.
        
        1. SYN          - Client machine sends a SYN packet to the server asking if it is open for new connections.
        2. SYN/ACK      - If the server can accept new connections, it’ll respond with an ACKnowledgment using a SYN/ACK packet.
        3. ACK          - The client will receive the SYN/ACK packet and will acknowledge it by sending an ACK packet.

        Then a TCP connection is established for data transmission!


The browser sends a HTTP request to the server

        Once the TCP connection is established, it is time to start transferring data! 

        Its established a connection with the server

        Makes a request for a specific page - bbc.co.uk/sport/premierleague


The server handles the request and sends back a HTTP response
        
        Server could be windows or Linux
        Many programming languages and frameworks can be used.
        Asp.net, Ruby etc inMoneycorp we use a tech from Microsoft called Asp.net
        Might look up some info a database, or call another service (to retrieve tha actual results). Pages are dynamically generated on the server
        sends all this back to the browser with a response code indicating if it has processed the request or if there was an error or if the browser should instead jump to another url

The browser begins rendering the HTML

        Assuming all went well the browser will then render the returned html
        Html is a series of tags in a text file. THese are essentially isnstructions telling your browser how to render a page
        Not a million miles away from a word document, except the instructions are stored with the test
        A heading like "Premier league results" would be displayed along with the font and text size with which to render this.  There may also be images, photos, graphics or videos displayed inline in the page
        The browser sends requests for additional objects embedded in HTML (images, css, JavaScript) and repeats steps 3-5.
        Once the page is loaded, the browser sends further async requests as needed.


all of this happens less than a second typically, (bit longer on the Moneycorp network!) if on a decent internet connection

in summary

The browser looks up the IP address for the domain name via DNS
Browser initiates a TCP connection with the server.
The browser sends a HTTP request to the server
The server handles the request and sends back a HTTP response
The browser begins rendering the HTML

